The Convergence of Hyper-Scale Data and Enterprise Business Intelligence: A Comprehensive Technical Analysis of Google BigQuery and Microsoft Power BI Integration
1. Executive Summary and Strategic Context
The contemporary enterprise data landscape is increasingly defined by a "best-of-breed" architectural strategy, moving away from monolithic single-vendor stacks toward heterogeneous ecosystems that leverage specific platform strengths. In this context, the integration of Google BigQuery and Microsoft Power BI has emerged as a dominant pattern. Organizations are drawn to BigQuery for its serverless architecture, separation of storage and compute, and ability to query petabyte-scale datasets using the Dremel engine. Simultaneously, Power BI remains the ubiquitous choice for business intelligence (BI) due to its deep integration with the Microsoft Office productivity suite and its highly performant VertiPaq in-memory engine.
However, bridging the gap between Google Cloud Platform (GCP) and Microsoft Azure—two distinct clouds with diverging identity models, query engines, and network topologies—presents significant engineering challenges. This report provides an exhaustive analysis of this integration, moving beyond basic connectivity to explore the architectural implications of storage modes, the mechanics of query folding, the implementation of advanced security models using Workforce Identity Federation, and the optimization of costs through slot management and query labeling.
The analysis indicates that while the native connector has matured, achieving sub-second query performance at scale requires a disciplined approach to modeling. The seamless interoperability often promised by marketing literature disguises complex friction points in three primary areas: authentication interoperability, query performance translation from DAX to SQL, and data structure mismatches regarding nested versus flat schemas. Success requires a holistic architectural view that encompasses network topology, semantic modeling, and rigorous cost governance.
2. Architectural Connectivity and Network Topology
The fundamental layer of any cross-cloud integration is the network. Establishing a robust connection between Power BI (hosted in Azure) and BigQuery (hosted in GCP) requires traversing the public internet or establishing private interconnects, and the architecture changes significantly depending on whether one uses the Power BI Service (SaaS) or Power BI Desktop.
2.1 The Native Connector vs. ODBC
Power BI offers a native Google BigQuery connector, which is built on top of the Simba Google BigQuery ODBC driver but heavily optimized by Microsoft to handle the translation of Power Query (M) transformations into GoogleSQL (formerly Standard SQL).1 This native connector is the recommended interface for the vast majority of use cases, supporting both Import and DirectQuery modes and abstracting complex OAuth flows that manual setups often struggle with.
However, the generic ODBC driver (Simba or ZappySys) remains a critical tool for niche scenarios.3 For example, legacy on-premises implementations where the native connector is unavailable or environments requiring specific driver configurations not exposed by the native UI may necessitate the ODBC route. The ODBC PowerPack, for instance, allows for granular control over connection string parameters such as AuthenticationMethod, Project, and Dataset directly in the DSN configuration, bypassing some of the abstraction layers of the native connector.3 This can be vital when automating connection updates via scripts or when specific SSL/TLS configurations are mandated by corporate security policies that the native connector's GUI does not expose.
2.2 The On-Premises Data Gateway: A Misunderstood Necessity
A common misconception in cloud-to-cloud integrations is that a gateway is unnecessary because both endpoints—Power BI and BigQuery—are cloud services. While true for standard public configurations, enterprise security requirements often necessitate an On-Premises Data Gateway.2
The primary driver for this is network isolation. If the BigQuery datasets are protected inside a VPC Service Controls perimeter or behind a private Google Access firewall that restricts ingress from the public internet, the Power BI Service—which operates on a massive range of public Azure IP addresses—cannot connect directly. In this scenario, a Gateway installed on a Virtual Machine (VM) acts as a bridge. This VM can be provisioned within Google Compute Engine (GCE) inside the same VPC as the data, or in Azure/On-Premises with a dedicated Interconnect or VPN to GCP. The Gateway effectively "proxies" the query, allowing the organization to whitelist only the Gateway's specific IP address in the GCP firewall rules, rather than opening the perimeter to the entire Power BI cloud IP range.
Furthermore, the Gateway allows for custom driver configurations that are impossible in the shared SaaS environment. For organizations that need to enforce specific ODBC flags or utilize local service account JSON keys that should not be uploaded to the cloud service, the Gateway provides a controlled environment to manage these secrets and configurations.3


  



2.3 Network Latency and Cross-Region Architectures
Performance in DirectQuery mode is inextricably linked to network latency. Unlike Import mode, where data resides locally in the Power BI Service, DirectQuery requires a round-trip to BigQuery for every visual interaction. A complex report page might generate 20 or more simultaneous queries. If the Power BI tenant is hosted in North Europe (Dublin) and the BigQuery dataset resides in us-central1 (Iowa), the physical distance introduces a latency floor—the Round Trip Time (RTT)—that no amount of query optimization can eliminate.
Empirical evidence suggests that cross-Atlantic RTT can add 100-200ms per query. For a "chatty" dashboard that triggers sequential queries, this can result in multi-second delays before rendering begins. Therefore, the cardinal rule of DirectQuery architecture is data co-location. Architects must verify the region of their Power BI tenant and provision their BigQuery datasets in the corresponding GCP region (e.g., europe-west1 for North Europe). If the Power BI tenant location is immutable and distant from the primary data lake, organizations should consider using BigQuery's cross-region replication or dataset copying features to stage a reporting replica of the data in the region closest to the Power BI tenant.1
3. Authentication and Identity Management
Authentication represents one of the most complex friction points in the BigQuery-Power BI integration due to the inherent mismatch between Microsoft Entra ID (formerly Azure AD) and Google Identity (IAM). The choice of authentication method is not merely a logistical decision; it fundamentally dictates the security posture of the solution and the capabilities of Row-Level Security (RLS).
3.1 OAuth 2.0 (User Account): The Personal Standard
The default authentication mechanism for Power BI Desktop is OAuth 2.0, where the user signs in with their Google credentials.3 Power BI uses a refresh token to request access tokens on behalf of the user. This method is intuitive for ad-hoc analysis and personal reporting but presents significant challenges for enterprise-grade production deployments.
The primary limitation lies in the token lifecycle. In the Power BI Service, OAuth tokens have expiration policies. Using a personal account to authenticate a mission-critical enterprise dataset creates a "key person dependency"—if that employee leaves the organization or changes their password, the refresh token becomes invalid, and the report refresh fails.1 Furthermore, when Power BI connects via a Gateway or requires specific advanced configurations, the "User" authentication type often lacks the persistence required for automated background refreshes, necessitating a more stable identity.
3.2 Service Accounts: The Traditional Enterprise Mechanism
Service Accounts are non-human accounts designed for machine-to-machine communication, decoupling the connection from any specific employee identity. This has historically been the standard for enterprise ETL and reporting.
To implement this, a JSON key file is generated in the Google Cloud Console.3 This file contains the private key used to sign authentication requests. In Power BI Desktop, the user selects "Service Account Login" and provides the service account email and the content of the JSON key file. This method offers stability and allows for key rotation practices to maintain security.
However, Service Accounts introduce a critical RLS Blind Spot.7 When Power BI connects using a Service Account, BigQuery sees all incoming queries as originating from a single identity (e.g., powerbi-svc@project.iam.gserviceaccount.com). Consequently, BigQuery's native Row-Level Security policies, which rely on the SESSION_USER() function to identify the caller, cannot distinguish between the end-users viewing the report. The Service Account has "superuser" access to the data, effectively bypassing database-level RLS. This forces developers to implement RLS entirely within the Power BI layer using DAX filters (e.g., USERNAME()), which adds complexity and can be less secure if users have Build permissions on the dataset.
3.3 Workforce Identity Federation: The Modern Convergence
Recognizing the limitations of Service Accounts and the friction of managing dual identities, Microsoft and Google have introduced Workforce Identity Federation, a sophisticated solution that bridges Entra ID and Google IAM.9
This architecture involves creating an Azure AD application registration and establishing a trust relationship with a Google Cloud Workforce Identity Pool. The setup requires defining an "Audience URI" in the format //iam.googleapis.com/locations/global/workforcePools/WORKFORCE_POOL_ID/providers/WORKFORCE_PROVIDER_ID.
The transformational benefit of this approach is the enablement of Single Sign-On (SSO) with identity propagation. When a user logs into Power BI with their corporate Azure AD credentials, that identity is federated and passed through to BigQuery. This allows the use of BigQuery's native Row-Level Security policies. A policy defined as CREATE ROW ACCESS POLICY... FILTER USING (SESSION_USER() = email) will correctly evaluate the actual email address of the business user viewing the report, rather than a generic service account.11 This unifies security management, allowing access policies to be defined once in the database and enforced across all tools, including Power BI.
Feature
	OAuth (User Account)
	Service Account (JSON Key)
	Workforce Identity Federation
	Primary Use Case
	Ad-hoc analysis, Personal BI
	Automated ETL, Non-RLS Reports
	Enterprise BI, Native RLS
	BigQuery Identity
	Individual Google User
	Service Account Email
	Mapped Azure AD User
	Maintenance
	High (Token expirations)
	Low (Key rotation required)
	Medium (Initial config complex)
	Security Risk
	Employee departure breaks report
	Key leakage/Exposure
	Lowest (Managed Identity)
	RLS Capability
	Native BQ RLS supported
	BQ RLS not supported (Single ID)
	Native BQ RLS supported
	4. Storage Modes: The Strategic Decision
The decision to use Import, DirectQuery, or Composite models is the single most significant factor influencing performance, functionality, and cost. It is not merely a toggle switch but a fundamental architectural choice that dictates how the solution behaves.
4.1 Import Mode: The Performance Baseline
In Import mode, data is queried from BigQuery, compressed, and stored in Power BI's internal VertiPaq engine.13 This effectively decouples the report performance from the BigQuery source performance during report interaction.
Strengths:
* Sub-second Response: Visuals render instantly because data is in-memory.
* Full Functionality: All DAX functions, including complex time intelligence and many-to-many relationships, are fully supported.
* Cost Predictability: BigQuery costs are incurred only during the scheduled refresh, not when users view the report.
Challenges:
* Data Latency: Data is only as fresh as the last scheduled refresh (max 8/day for Pro, 48/day for Premium).13
* Size Limitations: Datasets are limited by the capacity memory (1GB for Pro, up to 400GB for Premium).
* Refresh Failures: Large imports can time out or fail due to network glitches during the transfer of gigabytes of data.
Optimization Strategy: When importing from BigQuery, strict column pruning is essential. Power BI's columnar compression efficiency is highly dependent on cardinality. High-cardinality columns like TransactionID or UUID compress poorly and consume disproportionate memory. Architects should only import columns strictly required for analysis, filtering, or grouping.16
4.2 DirectQuery Mode: Scale and Sovereignty
DirectQuery leaves the data in BigQuery. Every interaction with a visual—clicking a slicer, drilling down, or cross-filtering—generates a SQL query that is sent to BigQuery for execution.13
Strengths:
* Real-Time Access: Users always see the latest data committed to BigQuery.
* Unlimited Scale: There is no limit on the dataset size; reports can query petabytes of data.
* Data Sovereignty: Data never leaves the BigQuery region, complying with strict residency requirements.
Challenges and Limitations:
* Performance Variability: Report speed is at the mercy of network latency and BigQuery slot availability.
* Concurrency Limits: BigQuery has a default limit on concurrent interactive queries (often 100). A single Power BI report page with 20 visuals can trigger 20 simultaneous queries. If 50 users access such a dashboard concurrently, the project can hit the concurrency quota, causing queries to queue and dashboards to freeze.17
* The 1-Million Row Limit: Power BI will not accept a result set from a DirectQuery source that exceeds 1 million rows. This is a safeguard for the browser and memory. Aggregations must effectively reduce the data volume before it returns to Power BI.13
4.3 Composite Models and Aggregations: The Hybrid Ideal
The "Gold Standard" for BigQuery integration is the Composite Model, often utilizing user-defined aggregations.20 This approach creates a layered architecture:
1. DirectQuery Layer: A connection is made to the granular fact table (e.g., 10 billion rows of transaction data) in BigQuery.
2. Import Layer (Aggregations): A summary table (e.g., Sales by Month by Region) is created in BigQuery or via Power Query and set to Import mode.
3. Relationship Management: Power BI is configured to recognize the Import table as an aggregation of the DirectQuery table.
When a user views a high-level dashboard (e.g., "Total Sales by Year"), Power BI invisibly queries the high-speed Import table (the "cache"). If the user drills down to the transaction level, Power BI seamlessly switches to DirectQuery mode to fetch the granular records. This hybrid approach hides the latency of DirectQuery for 90% of user interactions while preserving access to the full fidelity of the data.21
This architecture solves the concurrency issue by serving the majority of "chatty" visual queries from the in-memory cache, reserving BigQuery slots only for detailed analytical queries that require the full compute power of the cloud.
5. Google BigQuery Optimization Techniques
To make DirectQuery viable, the backend must be aggressively tuned. Power BI generates machine-written SQL which, while functional, is rarely optimal. The database administrator must implement strategies to minimize the data scanned and the slots consumed.
5.1 Partitioning and Clustering Strategy
Partitioning is non-negotiable for DirectQuery performance. Tables should be partitioned by a Date or Timestamp column (e.g., TransactionDate).2 When a user filters a Power BI report using a Date slicer, BigQuery uses "partition pruning" to scan only the relevant partitions (e.g., the last 30 days) rather than the entire history. This creates a linear relationship between the query cost and the time window selected, preventing a "SELECT *" catastrophe.24
Clustering complements partitioning by sorting data within each partition based on frequently filtered columns, such as CustomerID or Region. This allows BigQuery to perform "block pruning," skipping data blocks that do not match the filter criteria. For a Power BI report that frequently filters by Region, clustering the BigQuery table by Region can reduce bytes scanned—and therefore cost and latency—by orders of magnitude.25
5.2 BigQuery BI Engine: The In-Memory Accelerator
BigQuery BI Engine is a fast, in-memory analysis service layered on top of BigQuery.26 It serves as a transparent caching layer that is specifically designed to accelerate dashboarding workloads.
* Mechanism: BI Engine intelligently caches active columns and partitions in memory. It uses vectorized execution to serve sub-second responses for high-concurrency dashboards, effectively mitigating the network latency inherent in DirectQuery.
* Reservation Model: Unlike the standard on-demand pricing, BI Engine requires the reservation of capacity (GBs of RAM) in the GCP project. It is critical to mark tables used in Power BI as "preferred tables" to ensure they are prioritized in the cache.28
* Limitations: BI Engine has specific limitations. It does not support queries with wildcards or certain complex User-Defined Functions (UDFs). If a Power BI query uses unsupported features, execution falls back to standard BigQuery slots ("Partial Mode" or "Disabled"), which can result in a sudden performance drop.27
5.3 Materialized Views for Automatic Rewriting
For complex aggregations that are frequent in BI reports (e.g., SUM(Sales) BY Region, Product), Materialized Views offer a powerful optimization. Unlike standard views, these are pre-computed and stored. Crucially, BigQuery's "Smart Tuning" feature can automatically rewrite incoming queries to use the Materialized View even if the Power BI generated SQL targets the base table.29 This means developers do not need to change the Power BI data source; BigQuery optimizes the execution path transparently, potentially turning a 100GB scan into a 10MB read.27
6. The Power BI Engine: Query Folding and M Optimization
When transforming data in Power Query (the M language), Query Folding is the critical mechanism where transformations defined in the GUI are translated into native SQL and pushed to the BigQuery engine for execution.30
6.1 The Mechanics of Folding
If a user filters rows in Power BI (e.g., Keep Rows where Country = 'USA'), the connector attempts to generate a corresponding WHERE Country = 'USA' clause in the SQL sent to BigQuery. If the user groups data, it generates a GROUP BY clause. This ensures that only the relevant result set is transferred over the network.
However, certain M functions act as "Folding Breakers". These are transformations that have no direct SQL equivalent or are too complex for the connector to translate. Common breakers include:
* Changing data types in complex ways (e.g., parsing dates with specific locales).
* Adding Index columns (as SQL sets are unordered).
* Complex custom logic involving lists or records.
* Merging queries from incompatible sources (e.g., joining a BigQuery table with a local Excel file).30
When folding breaks, Power BI must revert to "Compensating Logic." It downloads the entire raw dataset resulting from the last foldable step and processes the remaining transformations locally in the Power BI Gateway or Desktop memory. For a BigQuery table with millions of rows, this catastrophic failure of folding can lead to refresh timeouts, memory overflow errors, and massive egress costs.
6.2 Best Practices for Folding
1. View Native Query Diagnosis: The primary diagnostic tool is to right-click the step in the Power Query "Applied Steps" pane and select "View Native Query".31 If this option is greyed out (disabled), query folding has stopped at a previous step. Developers must identify the breaking step and refactor the logic.
2. Push Down Logic: If a transformation cannot theoretically fold (e.g., complex regex parsing), the best practice is to move that logic upstream into a BigQuery View. By writing the transformation in SQL within BigQuery, the heavy lifting is handled by Google's clusters rather than the Power BI engine.2
3. Explicit Folding Flags: In custom SQL connectors or advanced scenarios, using the EnableFolding=true flag in the Value.NativeQuery function can explicitly force the engine to attempt folding for subsequent steps.31


  



7. DAX Optimization for DirectQuery
Writing DAX (Data Analysis Expressions) for DirectQuery requires a fundamentally different mindset than for Import mode. In Import, developers optimize for memory efficiency; in DirectQuery, the goal is to optimize for SQL generation efficiency.33
7.1 Referential Integrity and Inner Joins
By default, when Power BI joins two tables in DirectQuery mode, it generates LEFT OUTER JOIN SQL statements. This is a safety mechanism to ensure that if a transaction in the Fact table references a missing Dimension key, the transaction is still preserved in the results (usually grouped under a blank/unknown member).
However, LEFT JOINs are computationally expensive in distributed systems like BigQuery compared to INNER JOINs, as they restrict the optimizer's ability to filter the right side of the join early.
Optimization: In the Power BI Relationship view, developers should enable the "Assume Referential Integrity" setting on relationships. This forces Power BI to generate INNER JOIN statements, which can significantly improve query performance. This setting should only be enabled if the ETL process guarantees that every foreign key in the fact table has a corresponding primary key in the dimension table; otherwise, valid data will be silently dropped from the report.34
7.2 The Time Intelligence Pitfall
Standard DAX Time Intelligence functions (e.g., DATESYTD, SAMEPERIODLASTYEAR) are notoriously inefficient in DirectQuery mode. To calculate a "Year to Date" value, these functions often generate complex SQL that retrieves data at the day granularity before aggregating it. For a large dataset, this forces BigQuery to transmit a massive result set of daily values to Power BI for final aggregation, causing performance bottlenecks.36
Optimization: The recommended approach is to model time logic explicitly in the database or use "additive" DAX patterns. For example, instead of using SAMEPERIODLASTYEAR, developers can use mathematical date calculations on integer keys (e.g., subtracting 12 from a MonthID integer column: CALCULATE(SUM(Sales), MonthID = CurrentMonthID - 12)). This simplifies the generated SQL, allowing BigQuery to group by the Month column directly in the Storage Engine, reducing the data transfer volume.38
7.3 Reducing Measure Density
In DirectQuery, every measure in a visual typically spawns a separate SQL sub-query or a complex join. A matrix visual with 10 measures can trigger a massive, nested SQL query that exhausts BigQuery slots. Optimization involves reducing the number of measures per visual or using "Calculation Groups" to dynamically switch metrics rather than displaying them simultaneously.33
8. Handling Nested and Repeated Fields (JSON/Structs)
One of the most profound structural mismatches between BigQuery and Power BI is the handling of semi-structured data. BigQuery excels with denormalized, nested data structures using RECORD (STRUCT) and REPEATED (ARRAY) fields, which allow it to store complex objects like "Orders" nested inside a "Customer" row.39 Power BI, however, is a strictly relational tool that expects flat, two-dimensional tables.
8.1 The Flattening Challenge in Power Query
When the Power BI native connector encounters nested fields, it typically interprets them as text strings containing JSON. Power Query provides capabilities to Parse JSON and Expand Column, allowing developers to flatten these structures within the ETL layer.
The Performance Trap: While functionally correct, performing this expansion in Power Query often breaks query folding (as discussed in Section 6). Even if it folds, it can result in a "data explosion." Unnesting an array with 100 items for every row in a 1-million-row table results in a 100-million-row intermediate table. Transferring this volume of data from BigQuery to Power BI for processing is a primary cause of refresh timeouts.10
8.2 The SQL View Solution: Unnesting at Source
The most robust architectural pattern is to create a View in BigQuery that uses the SQL UNNEST() function to flatten the arrays before Power BI connects.41
Example Strategy:
Instead of connecting Power BI to the raw nested table, create a view:


SQL




SELECT
 user_id,
 order_detail.*
FROM `project.dataset.users`,
UNNEST(orders) as order_detail

This approach forces the "explosion" and flattening to happen on the BigQuery clusters, which are designed for this workload. Power BI then simply reads the resulting flat table.
Advanced Optimization: If the full detail is not required, avoid unnesting entirely. Instead, use a BigQuery View to pre-aggregate the nested data. For example, if the report only needs the count of orders per user, use ARRAY_LENGTH(orders) in the SQL view to return a single integer column, keeping the dataset small and performant.43
9. Security and Governance
Integrating security models across clouds requires a careful mapping of concepts and capabilities.
9.1 Row-Level Security (RLS) Propagation
Implementing RLS ensures that users only see data relevant to them (e.g., a Regional Manager seeing only their region's sales).
* Power BI RLS: Defined in Power BI Desktop (Manage Roles). This filters data after it is imported or querying. It works well for Import mode but requires maintaining a duplicate map of Users-to-Data within the Power BI file, which can drift from the source of truth.
* BigQuery Native RLS: BigQuery allows defining Row Access Policies on the table itself using the syntax CREATE ROW ACCESS POLICY... FILTER USING (SESSION_USER() = email). This applies security at the storage layer, ensuring no tool (Power BI, Tableau, CLI) can bypass it.
The Critical Integration Constraint: To leverage BigQuery's native RLS with Power BI, you must use an SSO authentication method (OAuth or Workforce Identity Federation). If you use a generic Service Account, the SESSION_USER() function in BigQuery will always return the service account's email address, not the end user's email. This renders the policy useless for individual user restriction, effectively showing all data to everyone who has access to the report.7 Therefore, for highly sensitive data where RLS is mandated at the database layer, Workforce Identity Federation is the only viable enterprise architecture.
9.2 Data Lineage and Governance
For enterprise governance, tracking the flow of data is essential. While Power BI has its own lineage view, it typically stops at the "Dataset" boundary. Integrating with Google Cloud Data Lineage (part of Dataplex) allows for a complete end-to-end view.
By enabling the Data Lineage API, organizations can track the full journey: Source Ingestion -> BigQuery Transformation Jobs -> Power BI Consumption. This allows data stewards to perform impact analysis—for example, determining which Power BI dashboards will break if a specific column in a BigQuery table is renamed.44
10. Cost Management and Operations
BigQuery's pricing model—typically charging by bytes scanned (Analysis) or slots used (Capacity)—means that an unoptimized Power BI report can generate significant unanticipated costs.
10.1 Query Labels for Cost Attribution
A major operational challenge is attributing BigQuery costs to specific Power BI reports. By default, all queries might look like generic traffic.
Technique: Organizations can utilize Query Labels to tag sessions. While the Power BI GUI does not expose a "Label" field, advanced configurations in the ODBC driver or utilizing the SET @@query_label command in the "Advanced SQL" option of the connector can inject key-value pairs into the job metadata.46
Monitoring: Administrators can then query the INFORMATION_SCHEMA.JOBS_BY_PROJECT view in BigQuery. By filtering for the specific labels or the Power BI User Agent, they can aggregate total_bytes_billed or total_slot_ms to identify exactly which Power BI report is driving cost spikes.48


  



10.2 Preventing Runaway Costs
To govern this environment, several controls should be implemented:
1. Project-Level Quotas: Set "Maximum bytes billed" quotas on the specific GCP project used by Power BI. This acts as a circuit breaker, preventing a poorly designed DAX query from consuming the entire monthly budget in a single afternoon.50
2. Cached Results: BigQuery caches query results for 24 hours. Power BI can leverage this if the generated SQL is identical. However, the use of RLS often disables caching because every user's query effectively becomes unique (e.g., WHERE user = 'alice' vs WHERE user = 'bob'). This trade-off between security and caching efficiency must be explicitly managed.24
11. Conclusion and Recommendations
The integration of Google BigQuery and Microsoft Power BI represents a powerful convergence of two industry-leading platforms, offering a path to scalable, data-driven decision-making. However, it is not a "plug-and-play" solution for high-performance enterprise scenarios. The default behaviors of both platforms—Power BI's conversational, iterative querying and BigQuery's scan-based, massively parallel execution—can lead to friction, latency, and excess cost if not actively managed through architecture.
Key Recommendations for Architects:
1. Adopt Composite Models: Reject the binary choice between Import and DirectQuery. Implement Composite Models with Aggregation tables to deliver the speed of import with the scale of the cloud.
2. Modernize Identity Architecture: Transition away from generic Service Accounts. Invest in setting up Workforce Identity Federation to enable true Single Sign-On, granular Row-Level Security, and accurate audit trails at the database layer.
3. Optimize the Source First: Power BI cannot magically accelerate a slow database design. Implementation of Partitioning, Clustering, and BI Engine reservations in BigQuery should be the first line of defense against performance issues.
4. Enforce Folding Discipline: Treat the "View Native Query" check as a mandatory step in the report development lifecycle. Any logic that breaks folding should be pushed upstream to a SQL View.
5. Simplify DAX for DirectQuery: Avoid complex Time Intelligence functions in DirectQuery mode; leverage the strength of the SQL engine by modeling date logic directly in the data warehouse.
By adhering to these architectural principles, organizations can successfully bridge the gap between Azure and GCP, leveraging the near-infinite scale of Google BigQuery while delivering the fast, interactive, and insightful experience that Power BI users demand.
Works cited
1. Connecting Power BI to Google BigQuery: A Complete ... - Medium, accessed January 21, 2026, https://medium.com/@vaishnavi_gandhi/connecting-power-bi-to-google-bigquery-a-complete-implementation-guide-383dbb059428
2. BigQuery Power BI Integration: Benefits, Architecture & Pitfalls, accessed January 21, 2026, https://responsiveanalytix.co.uk/bigquery-power-bi-integration/
3. Google BigQuery Connector for Power BI - ZappySys, accessed January 21, 2026, https://zappysys.com/api/integration-hub/google-bigquery-connector/power-bi
4. A Complete Guide for Google BigQuery Authentication Tutorial, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.progress.com/tutorials/odbc/a-complete-guide-for-google-bigquery-authentication
5. BigQuery Power BI Integration: Benefits, Architecture & Pitfalls, accessed January 21, 2026, https://medium.com/@david_55623/bigquery-power-bi-integration-benefits-architecture-pitfalls-2bcc721a1e4e
6. Google BigQuery connection guide, accessed January 21, 2026, https://docs.supermetrics.com/docs/google-bigquery-connection-guide
7. Introduction to BigQuery row-level security, accessed January 21, 2026, https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/row-level-security-intro
8. Google Big Query connection credentials, accessed January 21, 2026, https://community.fabric.microsoft.com/t5/Service/Google-Big-Query-connection-credentials/m-p/2550313
9. Access BigQuery data in Power BI with Workforce Identity ..., accessed January 21, 2026, https://docs.cloud.google.com/iam/docs/workforce-sign-in-power-bi
10. Google BigQuery (Microsoft Entra ID) - Power Query, accessed January 21, 2026, https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/power-query/connectors/google-bigquery-aad
11. 3 ways to protect your BigQuery data with row-level security, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.devoteam.com/expert-view/3-options-to-protect-bigquery-data-with-row-level-security/
12. Implementing Multi-Tenant Security Transparently and Effectively in ..., accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.doit.com/blog/implementing-multi-tenant-security-transparently-and-effectively-in-bigquery-via-your-preferred-bi/
13. DirectQuery in Power BI: When to Use, Limitations, Alternatives, accessed January 21, 2026, https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/power-bi/connect-data/desktop-directquery-about
14. Import vs Direct Query: Here's What You Need to Know - phData, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.phdata.io/blog/import-vs-direct-query-power-bi/
15. Power BI Import vs Direct Query: Which Should You Use?, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.newhorizons.com/resources/blog/power-bi-import-vs-direct-query
16. Which is better for large data sets, Direct or Import mode? : r/PowerBI, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.reddit.com/r/PowerBI/comments/1i2q83u/which_is_better_for_large_data_sets_direct_or/
17. BigQuery Quota Limit understanding - Data Analytics, accessed January 21, 2026, https://discuss.google.dev/t/bigquery-quota-limit-understanding/127645
18. Concurrency and limits on BigQuery - Reddit, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.reddit.com/r/bigquery/comments/1moi448/concurrency_and_limits_on_bigquery/
19. Power BI Gateway/Service DirectQuery Query Concurr..., accessed January 21, 2026, https://community.fabric.microsoft.com/t5/Service/Power-BI-Gateway-Service-DirectQuery-Query-Concurrency/m-p/1630398
20. How PowerBI Composite Model Works - Small Data And self service, accessed January 21, 2026, https://datamonkeysite.com/2022/03/24/how-powerbi-composite-model-works/
21. How Aggregation Tables Improve Performance for Power BI Reports, accessed January 21, 2026, https://nri-na.com/power-bi-report-aggregation-tables/
22. Automatic aggregations overview - Microsoft Fabric, accessed January 21, 2026, https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/fabric/enterprise/powerbi/aggregations-auto
23. Power BI with Transaction Data source in Google big Query, accessed January 21, 2026, https://community.fabric.microsoft.com/t5/Service/Power-BI-with-Transaction-Data-source-in-Google-big-Query/m-p/3505527
24. Mastering BigQuery: How to Dramatically Reduce Costs & Optimize ..., accessed January 21, 2026, https://infotrust.com/articles/mastering-bigquery-how-to-dramatically-reduce-costs-optimize-queries/
25. BigQuery Query Performance Optimization Guide 2025 - e6data, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.e6data.com/query-and-cost-optimization-hub/how-to-optimize-bigquery-query-performance
26. Learn how BI Engine enhances BigQuery query performance, accessed January 21, 2026, https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/data-analytics/learn-how-bi-engine-enhances-bigquery-query-performance
27. What is BI Engine? | BigQuery - Google Cloud Documentation, accessed January 21, 2026, https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/bi-engine-query
28. Introduction to BI Engine | BigQuery - Google Cloud Documentation, accessed January 21, 2026, https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/bi-engine-intro
29. How to Optimize BigQuery Costs? {Updated 2025 Guide} - e6data, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.e6data.com/query-and-cost-optimization-hub/how-to-optimize-bigquery-costs
30. Query Folding in Power BI: Supercharge Performance, accessed January 21, 2026, https://responsiveanalytix.co.uk/query-folding-in-power-bi/
31. Query Folding in Power BI: The Secret to Faster Data Refresh ..., accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.phdata.io/blog/query-folding-in-power-bi-the-secret-to-faster-data-refresh-performance/
32. What Is a Query Folding in Power BI and Why should You Care?, accessed January 21, 2026, https://towardsdatascience.com/what-is-a-query-folding-in-power-bi-and-why-should-i-care/
33. Optimizing DAX Code for Direct Query: Tips and Tricks - Medium, accessed January 21, 2026, https://medium.com/@technologIT/optimizing-dax-code-for-directquery-tips-and-tricks-ab1b5e6fd91f
34. Power BI Tips: Google BigQuery in DirectQuery Mode - cittabase, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.cittabase.com/power-bi-tips-google-bigquery-in-directquery-mode-2/
35. Tip to speed up Direct Query - Phil Seamark on DAX, accessed January 21, 2026, https://dax.tips/2019/07/18/tip-to-speed-up-direct-query/
36. Impact of Calendar Based Time Intelligence on Power BI ..., accessed January 21, 2026, https://blog.crossjoin.co.uk/2025/11/30/a-look-at-the-impact-of-calendar-based-time-intelligence-on-power-bi-directquery-performance/
37. Diagnosing Power BI DirectQuery performance problems caused by ..., accessed January 21, 2026, https://blog.crossjoin.co.uk/2026/01/04/diagnosing-power-bi-directquery-performance-problems-caused-by-sql-queries-that-return-large-resultsets/
38. Optimizing time intelligence in DirectQuery - SQLBI, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.sqlbi.com/articles/optimizing-time-intelligence-in-directquery/
39. How to perform joins and data denormalization with nested and ..., accessed January 21, 2026, https://cloud.google.com/blog/topics/developers-practitioners/bigquery-explained-working-joins-nested-repeated-data
40. Use nested and repeated fields | BigQuery, accessed January 21, 2026, https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/best-practices-performance-nested
41. Structs & Arrays in BigQuery: Understanding and Using Nested Data ..., accessed January 21, 2026, https://medium.com/orange-business/structs-arrays-in-bigquery-understanding-and-using-nested-data-structures-26de05a75622
42. Working with nested and repeated fields - Dimensions BigQuery Lab, accessed January 21, 2026, https://bigquery-lab.dimensions.ai/tutorials/04-nested/
43. Working with Nested and Repeated Fields in BigQuery - Medium, accessed January 21, 2026, https://medium.com/nerd-for-tech/working-with-nested-and-repeated-fields-in-bigquery-2eccc2641ee2
44. Use data lineage with Google Cloud systems | Dataplex Universal ..., accessed January 21, 2026, https://docs.cloud.google.com/dataplex/docs/use-lineage
45. A Practical Guide to Custom Lineage with Google's Data Lineage API, accessed January 21, 2026, https://medium.com/google-cloud/a-practical-guide-to-custom-lineage-with-googles-data-lineage-api-0ee8d4d3af2c
46. BigQuery Cost per Query Visibility with Labels - Vantage.sh, accessed January 21, 2026, https://www.vantage.sh/blog/bigquery-cost-per-query
47. How to label job execution in Dataform? - GA4Dataform, accessed January 21, 2026, https://ga4dataform.com/how-to-label-job-execution-in-dataform/
48. Monitor BigQuery reservations - Google Cloud Documentation, accessed January 21, 2026, https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/reservations-monitoring
49. Introduction to INFORMATION_SCHEMA | BigQuery, accessed January 21, 2026, https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/information-schema-intro
50. Quotas and limits | BigQuery - Google Cloud Documentation, accessed January 21, 2026, https://docs.cloud.google.com/bigquery/quotas